Act 0.1 release announcement (#7)
ethereum/fv-blog: _posts/2021-08-03-act-0.1.md

### Ease of Refinement

Proving properties directly against EVM bytecode is difficult and expensive. Compiler output
contains much extraneous detail (e.g. overflow checks, bitmasks in storage access routines, function
selector dispatch logic) that is not generally relevant when proving the correctness of a high level
property, but that must still be taken into account. A widely used and powerful technique is to use
a process of refinement, where the properties of interest are proven against a high level
specification that abstracts much of this detail away. A seperate proof can then be carried out to
show that a given bytecode object faithfully implements the abstract specification. The
[SeL4](https://sel4.systems/) microkernel is a notable real world application of this technique,
where properties are proven against a high level spec in the Isabelle proof assistant, and then
successive refinement steps (high level spec -> haskell implementation -> C implementation
-> binary compiler output) are used to prove these properties down to the binary level.

Act is a framework designed to allow for easy refinement. We want to make it as easy as possible for

> development teams to prove properties against a high level specification, and then to build a proof
> chain between this specification and an implementation of the spec in EVM bytecode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
development teams to prove properties against a high level specification, which can then either be used "upwards" to prove more higher level properties or "downwards" to demonstrate that an implementation in EVM bytecode conforms to the spec.
```

Reviewer: or smth along these lines

---
layout: post
published: true
title: Act 0.1 Released
date: '2021-08-03'
author: David Terry
category: 'Research & Development'
---

We have just published the first release of the Act specification language!

Act is a formal specification language, designed to allow for the construction of an exhaustive,
mathematically rigorous description of a smart contract system. Act allows diverse toolchains to
interoperate on a single specification, with each generating and exchanging different kinds of

> knowledge. It has a built in analysis engine that can automatically prove properties about the

Reviewer 2: Afaik "built-in" is a proper adjective and at least to me the hyphen makes the sentence easier to parse.

```suggestion
knowledge. It has a built-in analysis engine that can automatically prove properties about the
```

specification itself, as well as an integrated symbolic execution engine (based on
[hevm](https://fv.ethereum.org/2020/07/28/symbolic-hevm-release/)) that can prove equivalence
between a specification and a given bytecode object. Finally, specifications can be exported into
the Coq proof assistant, allowing for the verification of properties of almost arbitrary complexity,
all with a proof chain right down to the bytecode level.

> While a lot of work still remains to be done before act can be used to verify properties on

Reviewer 2: Let's normalize treating Act as a proper name imo.

```suggestion
While a lot of work still remains to be done before Act can be used to verify properties of
```

- [Bytecode Level Proof](#bytecode-level-proof)
- [Automated Analysis](#automated-analysis)
  - [Syntax](#syntax)
  - [Implementation](#implementation)
  - [Proving The Constant Product Invariant](#proving-the-constant-product-invariant)
  - [Underpowered Invariants](#underpowered-invariants)
- [Coq Export](#coq-export)
  - [A Brief Introduction to Proof in Coq](#a-brief-introduction-to-proof-in-coq)
  - [Act Export](#act-export)
- [Future Work](#future-work)
  - [Automated Spec Generation](#automated-spec-generation)
  - [Automated Checks for Spec Integrity](#automated-checks-for-spec-integrity)
  - [Support for Dynamic / Compound Types](#support-for-dynamic--compound-types)
  - [Multi Contract Specifications](#multi-contract-specifications)
  - [Rounding Error Analysis](#rounding-error-analysis)
  - [Calls Into Unknown Code](#calls-into-unknown-code)
  - [Loops and Loop Invariants](#loops-and-loop-invariants)
  - [Economic Analysis](#economic-analysis)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## Motivation & Design Philosophy

Smart contract development is difficult. The code we write must secure large sums of money in an

> extremely adverserial environment, and even a single oversight can easily result the loss of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
extremely adverserial environment, and even a single oversight can easily result in the loss of
```

millions of dollars. In this context being able to define and prove the correctness of key security

> properties is enourmously valuable. Act grew out of the verification work carried out for multi

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
properties is enormously valuable. Act grew out of the verification work carried out for multi
```

colateral dai and uniswap v2, and is a ground up rewrite in haskell of the prototype specification

> language developed as a part of this process, incorporating many of the lessons learned along the

Reviewer 2: such hypertext
very WWW
wow

```suggestion
properties is enourmously valuable. Act grew out of the work of [verifying multi-collateral Dai](https://github.com/dapphub/k-dss/) and [Uniswap v2](https://github.com/dapp-org/k-uniswap-v2), and is a ground-up rewrite in Haskell of the [prototypical specification language](https://github.com/dapphub/klab/blob/master/acts.md) which was developed as a part of that process, incorporating many of the lessons learned along the
```

way.

The following are some key design goals:

### Ease of Refinement

Proving properties directly against EVM bytecode is difficult and expensive. Compiler output
contains much extraneous detail (e.g. overflow checks, bitmasks in storage access routines, function
selector dispatch logic) that is not generally relevant when proving the correctness of a high level
property, but that must still be taken into account. A widely used and powerful technique is to use
a process of refinement, where the properties of interest are proven against a high level
specification that abstracts much of this detail away. A seperate proof can then be carried out to
show that a given bytecode object faithfully implements the abstract specification. The
[SeL4](https://sel4.systems/) microkernel is a notable real world application of this technique,
where properties are proven against a high level spec in the Isabelle proof assistant, and then
successive refinement steps (high level spec -> haskell implementation -> C implementation

> -> binary compiler output) are used to prove these properties down to the binary level.

Reviewer 2: I'm not familiar with SeL4 and its internal process, and am having trouble following here.

I presume that it first proves that the high-level spec has certain properties, and then? It compiles this spec to Haskell? And there exists some proof that the compilation from spec to Haskell preserves certain properties? (But presumably not all possible properties..?) And then the same thing happens again from Haskell to C and then finally to bytecode? Or am I misunderstanding?

Even if I got it right this may be worth clarifying since we use it as a pedagogical example.

Author: So I'm not deeply familiar with the SeL4 proof chain, but what I know is based on skimming these two papers: 

- http://www.sigops.org/s/conferences/sosp/2009/papers/klein-sosp09.pdf
- https://ts.data61.csiro.au/publications/nicta_full_text/6449.pdf

Which show that the refinement chain looks something like this down to the C semantics:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6689924/130928636-de51e1f0-c669-45b8-b219-771cfe4006da.png)

And like this from C to binary:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6689924/130928722-915bfaeb-8c1d-4668-88de-116d445e3868.png)

So as I understand it the high level spec is written in issabelle and various properties are proven against this. Then there is a refinement stage (again in issabelle), proving equivalence between the high level spec and the specification written in haskell (which has been imported into issabelle), a further (issabelle based) refinement step proves equivalence between the haskell spec and the C implementation (where the C implementation has been imported into issabelle via some lightweight C semantics), and finally there is a C -> binary refinement stage run using some custom SMT based analyis tooling.

Reviewer 2: Sorry, I may have been unclear. I wasn't really asking about how SeL4 works, I was just saying that as-is, I think this part of the text is pretty muddy if one is unfamiliar with the inner workings of SeL4, which I suspect most of our readers are.

Do you think it's pedagogically helpful to explicitly refer to the mechanics of SeL4? I don't think so. I think the text would be easier to follow if we simply described our architecture, and then we can score some credibility by mentioning that well-established tools (such as SeL4) essentially solve the issue in the same way.

Thoughts?

Act is a framework designed to allow for easy refinement. We want to make it as easy as possible for
development teams to define a high level specification, which can then either be used "upwards" to
prove higher level properties or "downwards" to demonstrate that an implementation in EVM bytecode
conforms to the spec.

### Modularity

> Different tools and techniques have different strengths and weaknesses, and with Act we want to make

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Different tools and techniques for formal verification have different strengths and weaknesses, and with Act we want to make
```

it as easy as possible to combine tools and share knowledge between them. For example an SMT based
analysis engine will usually be significantly faster and more convenient than a manual proof in a
tool like Coq, but the later can prove the correctness of statements that would be impossible to

> even state in the language accepted by an SMT solver.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
analysis engine will usually be significantly faster and more convenient than manually constructing
a proof in a proof assistant like Coq, but the latter can prove the correctness of statements that
would be impossible to even state in the language accepted by an SMT solver.
```

> With Act as an intermediate language, we can combine and share knowledge from many different tools

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With Act as an intermediate language, we can combine and share knowledge between many different tools
```

and frameworks in a way that allows us to leverage their different strengths where it makes most
sense.

> ### Expresiveness

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Expressiveness
```

Much of the work that we have released to date has been focused on making it easy for smart contract
developers to prove statements in the language that they are most familiar with (e.g. the
[SMTChecker](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.6/smtchecker.html) built directly into solc, or
the [integration of symbolic
execution](https://fv.ethereum.org/2020/12/11/symbolic-execution-with-ds-test/) into the ds-test
unit test framework). While this makes it easy to get fast results, and allows developers to quickly
build confidence in their implementation, there are limits to which kind of properties can be
expressed in such a framework. For example, some properties may require a greater numeric range than
the 256 bit integers available in the EVM allow, or others may require temporal or quantification

> operators that are simply not expressible in a language like solidity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the 256 bit integers available in the EVM allow, while others may require temporal operators or quantifiers, neither of which are expressible in a language like Solidity.
```

With Act we hope to provide a language expressive enough to natively express a wide range of

> properties, and combined with it's ability to export the specification into the Coq proof assistant

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
properties, and combined with its ability to export the specification into the Coq proof assistant,
```

> we believe that it should be possible to state almost any property about a given specification.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
we believe that it should be possible to express almost any property of a given specification.
```

## Installation

> Act can currently be installed via [nix](https://nixos.org/guides/install-nix.html) with the

Reviewer 2: These suggestions are mutually exclusive. My opinion is that we should either treat "Nix" as a proper name or as a command.

```suggestion
Act can currently be installed via [Nix](https://nixos.org/guides/install-nix.html) with the
```
```suggestion
Act can currently be installed via [`nix`](https://nixos.org/guides/install-nix.html) with the
```

following commands:

```
# configure nix to use prebuilt binaries for hevm (optional)
nix-shell -p cachix --command "cachix add dapp"

# install act v0.1
nix-env -iA act -if https://api.github.com/repos/ethereum/act/tarball/v0.1
```

> If you want to play around with the examples in this blogpost, you can checkout the

Reviewer 2: Really just a matter of taste I think? But the original text felt weird to me.

```suggestion
If you want to play around with the examples in this post, you can check out the
```

[act-examples](https://github.com/d-xo/act-examples) repo. A call to `nix-shell` from the repository
root will drop you into an environment with all required tools installed and configured.

## Language

At a very high level Act is a kind of mathy english over the EVM, where contracts are defined as a set
of pure functions taking a given EVM state (i.e. storage & blockchain context) and some calldata
and producing a new EVM state (`(EVM, Calldata) -> EVM`).

A specification of a contract written in act consists of a constructor and a set of behaviours:

- The constructor specification defines the structure of the contract state, the initial value for
  the state, and a list of invariants that the contract should satisfy.

- Each behaviour specification determines how a contract method updates the state, and its return

>   value, and the conditions that must be satisfied in order for it to be applied.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A specification of a contract written in Act consists of a *constructor* and a set of *behaviours*:

- The *constructor specification* defines the structure of the contract's state, the initial value of
  the state, and a list of invariants that the contract should satisfy.

- Each *behaviour specification* determines how a contract method updates the state, the method's return
  value (if any), and any conditions that must be satisfied in order for the state update to be applied.
```

Alternatively, they can be thought of an initial state and a set of state transitions, determining
an inductively defined state transition system.

> A more detailed level language reference can be found [here](https://github.com/ethereum/act/blob/master/docs/act.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A more detailed high level language reference can be found [in the documentation](https://github.com/ethereum/act/blob/master/docs/act.md).
```

### Types

> The types of Act consist of three basic primitives: Integers, Booleans and ByteStrings. Integers are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The types of Act consist of three basic primitives: Integers, Booleans and Bytestrings. Integers are
```

unbounded, with true integer operations. However, as our integer expressions will often represent
words in the EVM, we allow ourselves a slight abuse of notation and denote by `uintN`/`intN` integers

> together with the constraint that the value fits into a `uintN`/`intN`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
together with the constraint that the value fits into a `uintN`/`intN`. If any
operation could over- or underflow this bound, the constraint will be unfulfilled
and the specification will fail to prove.
```

Using conventional ABI types for typing also allows us to specify function signatures in a concise way.

> As an example consider this specification of a trivial contract that adds two numbers and stores the result on chain:

Reviewer 2: I'm all for short paragraphs but these sentences really seem like they belong together? :)

```suggestion
Using conventional ABI types for typing also allows us to specify function signatures in a concise way.
As an example, consider this specification of a trivial contract that adds two numbers and stores the result on chain:
```

```act
constructor of Add
interface constructor()

creates

  uint result := 0
```
```act
behaviour add of Add
interface add(uint x, uint y)

iff in range uint

   x + y

storage

  result => x + y

returns x + y
```

> In more verbose terms, this specification would read:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Expressed in English and math, this specification would read:
```

> The contract `Add` has a single state variable, named `result`, which is an integer s.t. `0 <= result < 2^256`.

Reviewer 2: I'm not opposed to jargon-abbreviations but let's at least type out the entire thing on the first usage? Luckily the next usage comes directly afterwards so its meaning should be easy to infer given a previous example.

```suggestion
The contract `Add` has a single state variable, named `result`, which is an integer such that `0 <= result < 2^256`.
```

Given any pair of integers `x` and `y`, s.t. `0 <= x < 2^256` and `0 <= y < 2^256`, an ABI encoded

> call to the contract `Add` with the signature `add(uint256,uint256)`, and `x` and `y`, will:

Reviewer 2: Any reason we don't include `x` and `y` in the signature, like so?:
```suggestion
call to the contract `Add` with the signature `add(uint256 x,uint256 y)` will:
```
Maybe signatures aren't formatted like that? In that case I suggest we write this instead:
```suggestion
call to the contract `Add` with the signature `add(uint256,uint256)`, with its respective arguments named `x` and `y`, will:
```

- store `x + y` in `result` and return `x + y` if `0 <= x + y < 2^256`
- revert otherwise

## Bytecode Level Proof

Act leverages the [symbolic execution engine in
hevm](https://fv.ethereum.org/2020/07/28/symbolic-hevm-release/) to provide a backend that can prove
equivalence between a contract specification and an implementation of that specification in EVM.

> Two claims are generated for each behaviour, `Pass` and a `Fail`. The `Pass` claim states

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Two claims are generated for each behaviour, `Pass` and `Fail`. The `Pass` claim states
```

that if all preconditions in the `iff` block are true, then all executions will succeed, storage

> will be updated according to the `storage` block, and the expected value will be returned. The

Reviewer 2: This may look like completely unnecessary but for a second I actually thought that the current text was referring to the [expected value of a random variable](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Expected_value), so we may as well minimize any confusion.

```suggestion
will be updated according to the `storage` block, and the specified return value will, in fact, be returned. The
```

`Fail` claim states that should any of the preconditions be false, all executions will revert.

In both cases we begin the proof by constraining calldata to be of the form specified in the behaviours'

> `interface` block (i.e. a concrete selector with abstract types), making the relevant assumptions

Reviewer 2: >i.e. a concrete selector with abstract types

what mean?

Author: so if we wanted to symbolically execute a method with the signature `add(uint, uint)`, we fill the calldata buffer in the EVM state with a buffer that looks like this:

```
function selector (concrete, e.g. `0x123456`) | symbolic uint256 | symbolic uint 256
```

Not sure how to best express that or if it's simply too much detail?

Reviewer 2: Yes, too much detail imo, especially since it's of no consequence to anything else we discuss.
```suggestion
`interface` blocks, as well as making the relevant assumptions
```

> depending on whether the proof is a `Pass` or `Fail` kind, and then symbolically executing

Reviewer 2: For consistent disambiguation between "proof" and "claim".

```suggestion
depending on whether the claim is `Pass` or `Fail`, and then symbolically executing
```

the bytecode object with storage held to be completely abstract.

> This produces a tree of potential executions where each node in the tree is a potential branching

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This produces a tree of potential executions where each node represents a potential branching
```

point, and the each leaf is a contract state. The leaves of the tree represent all possible post

> states of the contract after the execution of a single call.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
point, and each leaf represents a possible final state of the contract after the execution of a single call.
```

In the case of a `Fail` proof, we then can check that each leaf on the tree is in a reverted state, and

> for a `Pass` proof we can check that storage has been updated as expected, and that the contents of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the case of a `Fail` claim, we can then check that each leaf represents a state in which execution
has reverted, while for a `Pass` claim we can check that storage has been updated as expected, and that the contents of
```

Author: hmmmmm, I think I was trying to make a seperation between the claim (i.e. the act AST), and the procedure by which we would verify the correctness of that claim (the proof). Do you think the distinction doesn't make sense?

Reviewer 2: Ah, hmm. We could probably make that distinction instead but iirc a bit further up both `Pass` and `Fail` were referred to as "claims", which was why I made these suggestions for consistency; I can accept most terminologies as long as we pick one and stick with it as far as possible.

But if I were dictator I would prefer to only call things proofs when it is certain that they are valid; until it is, they are unproven claims. So I personally still vote for "claims" here. But again, I'm completely ok with your distinction too.

> the return buffer match that defined in the behaviour's `returns` block.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the case of a `Fail` claim, we can then check that all leaves represent states in which execution
has reverted. Inversely, for a `Pass` claim we can check that in all leaves, storage has been updated as expected and the content of
the return buffer matches what was specified in the behaviour's `returns` block.
```

As an example, consider the following contract:

```solidity
contract Simple {
    uint val;

    function set(uint x) external payable returns (uint) {
        require(x > 100);
        val = x;
        return x;
    }
}
```

> We can represent this in act as:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can represent this in Act as:
```

```act
constructor of Simple
interface constructor()

creates

  uint val := 0
```

```act
behaviour set of Simple
interface set(uint x)

iff

  x > 100

storage

  val => x

returns x
```

Act needs to have access to the storage layout metadata output by solc to compute the index in
storage for each variable mentioned in the spec, so we need to pass a solc output json when trying
to prove equivalence. In the [examples repo](https://github.com/d-xo/act-examples) you can run `dapp
build` and then `act hevm --spec src/simple.act --soljson out/dapp.sol.json` to attempt to prove

> equivalence between the spec and the runtime bytecode:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
equivalence of the spec and the runtime bytecode:
```

```
< act hevm --spec src/simple.act --soljson out/dapp.sol.json
checking postcondition...
Q.E.D.
Successfully proved set(Pass), 2 cases.
checking postcondition...
Q.E.D.
Successfully proved set(Fail), 2 cases.
```

> If we try to prove equivalence against a faulty implementation like the one below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If we try to prove equivalence of the spec and a faulty implementation like the one below:
```

```solidity
contract Simple {
    uint val;

    function set(uint x) external payable returns (uint) {
        require(x > 100);
        if (x == 2000) {
          val = x + 1;
        } else {
          val = x;
        }
        return x;
    }
}
```

Then Act will give us a counterexample showing a case where the implementation differs from the
specification:

```
< act hevm --spec src/simple.act --soljson out/dapp.sol.json
checking postcondition...
Calldata:
0x60fe47b100000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000007d0
Caller:
0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000
Callvalue:
0
Failed to prove set(Pass)
checking postcondition...
Q.E.D.
Successfully proved set(Fail), 2 cases.

> ```

Reviewer 2: Especially without color coded output, this looks weird at first glance. Seeing `Successfully proved` on the last line as a lazy programmer, I would likely assume that everything is hunky dory. Maybe we'd like to add a final line of output which summarizes the individual outputs?

E.g. `dapp.sol does NOT satisfy simple.act. Failed to prove the Pass claim.`?

Author: very good idea

Reviewer 2: As per the new PR:

````suggestion
```
< act hevm --spec src/simple.act --soljson out/dapp.sol.json
checking postcondition...
Calldata:
0x60fe47b100000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000007d0
Caller:
0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000
Callvalue:
0
Failed to prove set(Pass)
checking postcondition...
Q.E.D.
Successfully proved set(Fail), 2 cases.
==== FAILURE ====
1 out of 2 claims unproven:

1	Failed to prove set(Pass)
```
````

## Automated Analysis

Act has an integrated analysis engine that is currently able to automatically prove two kinds of

> property:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
properties:
```

- Behaviour level postconditions (i.e. properties that are always true in every possible poststate of a single behaviour)

> - Contract level invariants (i.e. properties that are always true for every possible contract state)

Reviewer 2: This may seem like a nitpick but just a little bit above we literally talked about "states" in the sense of the actual execution. Invariants don't make any claim about those states, but are only concerned with the final states produced by `constructor`s and `behaviour`s.

```suggestion
- Contract level invariants (i.e. properties that are true in all possible poststates of the constructor, as well as in all possible pre- and poststates of any behaviours)
```

> ### Syntax

Reviewer 2: Just to make each section a bit shorter and more focused.

```suggestion
### Postcondition syntax
```

> Postconditions are defined at the behaviour level in the `ensures` block. All references to storage

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Postconditions are defined in an optional `ensures` block of each `behaviour`. All references to storage
```

> in an `ensures` block must to specify whether they talk about the variable's value in the pre- or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in an `ensures` block must specify whether they talk about the variable's value in the pre- or
```

the poststate, by using `pre(x)` or `post(x)`.

An example:

```act
behaviour f of F
interface f(uint z)

storage

  y => z
  x => 30 * z

ensures

  post(x) == 30 * post(y)
```

> Invariants are defined in the `invariants` block in the constructor specification. Each invariant is

Reviewer 2: As above, more focus through shorter sections.

```suggestion

### Invariant syntax

Invariants are defined in the `invariants` block in the constructor specification. Each invariant is
```

> a predicate that should hold for every possible contract state. Invariant predicates have access to

Reviewer 2: It feels to me like we need a technical term which is equivalent to "constructor or behaviour". I'm using "state transition" here since further up we described constructors as state defs and behaviours as transitions, but maybe there is something better?

```suggestion
a predicate that should hold between the execution of any state transitions. Invariant predicates have access to
```

the constructor's calldata. Note that since invariant predicates are defined over a single abstract
contract state (instead of a pair of states as with the predicates in the `ensures` block), we do

> not need to disambiguate storage references with `pre` and `post`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
contract state (as opposed to predicates in `ensures` blocks which have access to a pair of states),
it is neither necessary nor allowed to disambiguate storage references using `pre(x)` and `post(x)`
in invariant predicates.
```

An example:

```act
constructor of C
interface constructor(uint _x, uint _y, uint _z)

iff _x * _y == _z

creates

  uint x := _x
  uint y := _y

invariants

  x * y == _z
```

### Implementation

In order to discharge these proofs, we construct an

> [SMT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Satisfiability_Modulo_Theories) based encoding of each behaviour

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[SMT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Satisfiability_Modulo_Theories)-based encoding of each behaviour
```

in the spec, and then dispatch queries based on this encoding to an SMT solver (currently z3 and
cvc4 are supported).

For the postcondition claims, we tell the solver to assume the truth of all preconditions, and that

> all storage updates have occurred as defined in the `storage` block, and then ask it to find

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When proving postcondition claims, it is quite uninformative to prove that they are satiable by *some*
variable configuration; there could still be many others which violate it. Instead, we attempt to violate
it and hope that we fail. We tell the solver to assume all preconditions as well as that
all storage updates have occurred as specified in the `storage` block. We then ask it to find
```

Author: maybe worth splitting out into a seperate paragraph talking about how SMT proofs work, with a little bit of into into what an SMT solver actually does?

Reviewer 2: Yes, agreed.

an assignment for the abstract variables in the spec (calldata, environment, and storage) that would

> lead to a violation of the postcondition. If none can be found, then we have a proof that the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
an assignment for the abstract variables in the spec (calldata, environment, and storage) that violates the postcondition. If none can be found, we have a proof that the
```

postcondition always holds.

> For the invariant claims, we attempt to construct an inductive proof. We first ask the solver to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Invariant claim are proved inductively. For the base case, we ask the solver to
```

once again assume preconditions and storage rewrites, and then to find an assignment for the
variables in the constructor that would result in a violation of the invariant predicate over the

> poststate, if none can be found we have a proof of the base case. For the inductive step we

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
poststate. If none can be found, we have a proof of the base case.

For the inductive step, we
```

construct a query for each behaviour that assumes preconditions and storage rewrites, and
additionally assumes that the invariant claim is true over the prestate. We then ask the solver to
find an assignment for the variables in the behaviour that would result in a violation of the
invariant predicate over the storage post state. If none can be found, we have an inductive proof
that the invariant must hold over all possible contract states.

### Proving The Constant Product Invariant

> As an example consider the following specification of a highly simplified uniswap style [constant

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a larger and practical example, let's consider the following specification of a highly simplified Uniswap-style [constant
```

product](https://www.paradigm.xyz/2021/07/twamm/#The_Constant_Product_Formula) automatic market
maker. For the purposes of this example we focus only on the core logic, and ignore e.g.
interactions with the underlying tokens.

The `Amm` has two state variables representing its underlying token balances, `reserve0` and
`reserve1`. These are initialized to `1000` units each upon creation.

We define a single invariant, that the product of the two reserves should never decrease. This is an

> important safety property, if it is violated, an attacker will be able to execute a sequence of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
important safety property – if it is violated, an attacker is able to execute a sequence of
```

to the `x * y == k` constant product formula.

```act
behaviour swap0 of Amm
interface swap0(uint256 amt)

iff in range uint256

    reserve0 + amt

storage

    reserve0 => reserve0 + amt
    reserve1 => (reserve0 * reserve1) / (reserve0 + amt)
```

```act
behaviour swap1 of Amm
interface swap1(uint256 amt)

iff in range uint256

    reserve1 + amt

storage

    reserve0 => (reserve0 * reserve1) / (reserve1 + amt)
    reserve1 => reserve1 + amt
```

If we run `act prove` against the above spec, we find that there is in fact an error:

```
> act prove --file src/amm-broken.act

Invariants:

  ((1000 * 1000) <= (Amm.reserve0 * Amm.reserve1)) of Amm violated:

    counterexample:

      calldata:

        swap0(amt = 1)

      storage:

        prestate:

          Amm.reserve0 = 2
          Amm.reserve1 = 500000

        poststate:

          Amm.reserve0 = 3
          Amm.reserve1 = 333333

    counterexample:

      calldata:

        swap1(amt = 1)

      storage:

        prestate:

          Amm.reserve1 = 2
          Amm.reserve0 = 500000

        poststate:

          Amm.reserve1 = 3
          Amm.reserve0 = 333333
```

> If the `Amm` starts with `reserve0 == 2` and `reserve1 == 5000,000`, and `swap0` is called with `amt

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the `Amm` is in the state  `reserve0 == 2` and `reserve1 == 5000,000`, and `swap0` is called with `amt
```

== 1`, the final state of the `Amm` will be `reserve0 == 3` and `reserve1 == 333,333`. The same is
true with `swap1` if the amounts for `reserve0` and `reserve1` are switched. In these cases `3 *

> 333,333` is `999,999`, and in fact the product of the reserves has decreased slightly due to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
333,333` is `999,999`, meaning that the product of the reserves has decreased slightly due to
```

```act
constructor of C
interface constructor()

creates

  uint x := 0

invariants

  x < 9
```

```act
behaviour f of C
interface f()

case x == 0:

  storage

    x => 1
```

```act
behaviour g of C
interface g()

case x == 1:

  storage

    x => 2
```

```act
behaviour h of C
interface h()

case x == 7:

  storage

    x => 100
```

The contract `C` can never be in a state where `x == 7` and so the write of `100` to `x` in `j()` can
never occur, however if we run `act prove` against this specification, this exact case (`x == 7`) is
found as a counterexample:

```
> act prove --file src/underpowered.act

Invariants:

  (C.x < 9) of C violated:

    counterexample:

      calldata:

        h()

      storage:

        prestate:

          C.x = 7

        poststate:

          C.x = 100
```

This is due to the inductive nature of the proof: Act checks that the invariant holds after
running the constructor, and then for each method assumes that the invariant holds over the pre state
and checks that the invariant holds over the post state.

In the case above, the invariant states that `x < 9`, and if this is assumed as a precondition, then

> the `x == 7` branch in `j()` is still reachable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the `x == 7` branch in `h()` is still reachable.
```

We can fix this by strengthening the invariant to make the `x == 7` branch unreachable, in the case
of the spec above, an invariant of `x < 7` is sufficient, although `x < 3` is the strongest

> invariant of this form that holds over the full transition system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can fix this by strengthening the invariant to make the `x == 7` branch unreachable. Specifically, the
weakest invariant that does hold over the full transition system (while remaining on the same form as the
original) is `x < 7`. The strongest is `x < 3`.
```

## Coq Export

While the automated proof backend is quite capable, there are still many properties that are too
challenging for automated tools. For this reason Act allows exporting the transition system to the
Coq proof assistant, where manual proofs of arbitrary complexity can be carried out.

> A proof assistant provides tools that help with the construction of proof.  Coq, in particular, is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A proof assistant provides tools that help with the construction of proofs. Coq, in particular, is
```

Reviewer 3: It still says `proof` instead of `proofs`

highly interactive. The user typically builds proofs step by step, with the software giving feedback
as the proof progresses.

> The requirements for proof in a system like Coq, Isabelle, or Lean are quite strict. These tools

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The requirements on proofs in a system like Coq, Isabelle, or Lean are quite strict. These tools
```

Reviewer 3: Same here

only accept proofs that are algorithmically verifiable to be valid series of applications of the
system's inference rules.  This is generally stricter than what is typically expected of pen and
paper proofs, which often omit tedious details in the interest of clarity and concision.

The verification is performed in a minimal and well audited kernel. Although occaisionally bugs have

> been found in Coq's and other system's kernels, proof in these systems is generally quite strong

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The verification of these proofs is performed in a minimal and well-audited kernel. Although occasionally bugs have
been found in Coq's and other systems' kernels, a proof in these systems is generally quite strong
```

evidence.

> ### A Brief Introduction to Proof in Coq

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### A Brief Introduction to Proofs in Coq
```

Reviewer 3: Same here

> Coq is a complex system with a non trivial learning curve, while a full tutorial on programming in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Coq is a complex system with a steep learning curve, and while a full tutorial on programming in
```

Coq is out of the scope of this blog post, we can give a little taste of how things work. For a more

> thorough introduction the books [Software Foundations](https://softwarefoundations.cis.upenn.edu/)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
thorough introduction, the books [Software Foundations](https://softwarefoundations.cis.upenn.edu/)
```

and [Certified Programming With Dependent Types](http://adam.chlipala.net/cpdt/) are both excellent.
Software Foundations in particular is a great introduction for users with little experience in the

> fields of formal logic and proof.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
fields of formal logic and proofs.
```

Reviewer 3: Same here

The Coq system is composed of three languages: a minimal functional programming language (Gallina),

> a tactics language for the construction of proof (Ltac), and a "vernacular" for interaction with the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a tactics language for the construction of proofs (Ltac), and a "vernacular" for interaction with the
```

Reviewer 3: Same here

kernel.  Lets start with the very basics: defining the natural numbers and proving something about
addition.

We start by defining the type of natural numbers. There are infinitely many natural numbers, so of
course they must be defined inductively. In fact, all type definitions are done with the `Inductive`

> vernacular command, even if they are not in fact recursive. Coq's `Inductive` is analagous to

Reviewer 2: Consistent language.

```suggestion
vernacular command, even if they are not in fact inductive. Coq's `Inductive` is analagous to
```

Haskell's `data` and OCaml's `type` (with the added power of dependent types).

We define two constructors: `O`, representing `0`, and `S`, which when applied to the natural number

> `n` produces the representation of the number `n + 1` (the Successor). To give a concrete example

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`n` produces the representation of the number `n + 1` (`S` as in "successor"). To give a concrete example,
```

`3` would be represented in this encoding as `S (S (S 0)))` i.e `1 + (1 + (1 + 0))`.

```Coq
Inductive nat : Type :=
  | O
  | S (n : nat).
```

This is an example of a [unary](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unary_numeral_system) number
representation.  It can often be helpful to represent numbers this way, since the inductive nature
of the definition lends itself to inductive proof techniques.

> Lets continue by defining addition over our `nat` type:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's continue by defining addition over our `nat` type:
```

```Coq
Fixpoint plus (n : nat) (m : nat) : nat :=
  match n with
  | O ⇒ m
  | S n' ⇒ S (plus n' m)
  end.
```

Here we define a recursive function (a `Fixpoint`) that takes two numbers `n` and `m` and returns
the sum of these two numbers. The implementation is defined recursively with pattern matching. You

> might think of this definition as "unwrapping" the applications of `S`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
might think of this definition as "unwrapping" each application of `S` from the first argument until
we reach its `O`. Then we start wrapping the second argument in the same number of `S`s.
```

Now we're ready to prove something! Lets prove that `0 + n == n`:

```Coq
Theorem plus_O_n :
  forall n : nat, plus O n = n.
Proof.

>   intros n. simpl. reflexivity.

Reviewer 2: `intros n.` is never explained.

Author: I was kinda trying not to get too into the weeds with the proof, I think intros is hard to explain without a running instance of proof general or similar? Do you have a suggestion?

Reviewer 2: I have no idea, I don't know what it does or how complicated it is. I was taking this blog post as an opportunity to learn some Coq and understand our Coq backend, so it felt a bit odd that it was the only part of this particular proof that wasn't referenced at all in the explanation.

But I just skimmed some explanation of its meaning and from what I understand it's necessary because we have `forall` in the theorem? Kind of like saying "now we're gonna work with this particular variable"? If so, how about [this suggestion](https://github.com/ethereum/fv-blog/pull/7/files#r696579087)?

Qed.
```

We first define our theorem and give it a name (`plus_O_n`). Then we define the proof goal, in the
form of a dependent type. We claim that for all `n`, where `n` is an instance of our `nat` type, `0
+ n` is equal to `n`. Finally, we construct a proof, in the form of a series of tactics. Tactics may
implement either backwards inference (transforming the goal) or forwards inference (transforming
evidence).

> The best way to understand the system is to run the software your self, and play around with the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The best way to understand the system is to run the software yourself, and play around with the
```

multiplication. The contract is initialized with a base (`b`) and an exponent (`e`). `exp()` can
then be repeatedly called until `e` is `1`, and the result can then be read from the storage
variable `r`. While obviously artificial, this example does highlight a key shortcoming of the SMT
based analysis: exponentiation with a symbolic exponent is simply unexpressible in the smt-lib
language used by all major SMT solvers, and so any contract making use of exponentiation where the
exponent is a variable of some kind (e.g. calldata, storage) will be impossible to verify using SMT.
Coq has no such restrictions, and we can export the spec below and prove correctness there.

```act
constructor of Exponent
interface constructor(uint _b, uint _e)

iff

    _e > 0

creates

    uint b := _b
    uint e := _e
    uint r := _b
```

```act
behaviour exp of Exponent
interface exp()

iff

    e > 1

iff in range uint

    r * b
    e - 1

storage

    r => r * b
    e => e - 1
    b
```

You can export the spec into Coq by running `make Exponent.v` in the `src/exponent` directory of the
[examples repo](https://github.com/d-xo/act-examples).  This will create a file called `Exponent.v`

> which contains a model of the above act specification in Coq:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which contains a model of the above Act specification in Coq:
```

{ b : Z
; e : Z
; r : Z
}.

Definition exp0 (STATE : State)  :=
state (b STATE) (((e STATE) - 1)) (((r STATE) * (b STATE))).

Definition Exponent0 (_b : Z) (_e : Z) :=
state (_b) (_e) (_b).

Inductive reachable  : State -> State -> Prop :=
| Exponent0_base : forall (_b : Z) (_e : Z),
     (_e > 0)
  -> ((0 <= _b) /\ (_b <= (UINT_MAX 256)))
  -> ((0 <= _e) /\ (_e <= (UINT_MAX 256)))
  -> reachable (Exponent0 _b _e) (Exponent0 _b _e)

| exp0_step : forall (BASE STATE : State),
     reachable BASE STATE
  -> ((e STATE) > 1)
  -> ((0 <= ((r STATE) * (b STATE))) /\ (((r STATE) * (b STATE)) <= (UINT_MAX 256)))
  -> ((0 <= ((e STATE) - 1)) /\ (((e STATE) - 1) <= (UINT_MAX 256)))
  -> ((0 <= (r STATE)) /\ ((r STATE) <= (UINT_MAX 256)))
  -> ((0 <= (e STATE)) /\ ((e STATE) <= (UINT_MAX 256)))
  -> ((0 <= (b STATE)) /\ ((b STATE) <= (UINT_MAX 256)))
  -> reachable BASE (exp0 STATE )
.
```

Let's break this down a bit. We have a definition of contract storage `State`, which consists of
three variables `b`, `e` and `r`, all of type `Z`. `Z` is an integer type using a binary encoding
from the [`ZArith`](https://coq.inria.fr/library/Coq.ZArith.ZArith_base.html#) library bundled with
Coq.

> Next we have `exp0`, which defines how state is updated by the `exp` behaviour, and `Exponent0`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next we have `exp0`, which defines how the state is updated by the `exp` behaviour, and `Exponent0`
```

- `exp0_step`: states that for a pair of states `BASE` and `STATE`, `exp0 STATE` (i.e. the result of
    calling `exp()` against an arbitrary contract state) is reachable from `BASE` if `STATE` is
    reachable from `BASE`, all the state variables in `STATE` (`e`, `b`, `r`) are within the range
    of a `uint256`, the result of the calculations `r * b` and `e - 1` are within the range of a
    `uint256`, and `e` is greater than `1`.

This gives us a pair of [inference rules](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inference_rules) that we can
use to prove facts about the set of reachable states defined by the specification for the `Exponent`
contract.

An example of such a proof is contained in the `Theory.v` file in the `src/exponent` directory of
the [examples repo](https://github.com/d-xo/act-examples). The core fact that we wish to prove is
that when `e` is `1`, `r` is equal to `b ^ e`. This can be expressed in coq as:

```Coq
forall (base, s : State),
  reachable base s -> e s = 1 -> r s = (b base) ^ (e base).
```

Expressed more verbosely: for all states `base` and `s`, if `s` is reachable from `base`, and the

> value of `e` in `s` is `1` then the result variable `r` in `s` has the value of `b` from `base`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
value of `e` in `s` is `1`, then `r` in `s` is equal to `b` from `base`
```

raised to the power of `e` from `base`.

The full proof is reproduced below. While an explanation of each step is out of scope for this post
(and is anyway best made with the proof loaded into an interactive instance of the Coq prover like
[proof general](https://proofgeneral.github.io/) or
[CoqIde](https://coq.inria.fr/refman/practical-tools/coqide.html)), we can give a broad strokes overview.

> We must first define a helper fact `pow_pred` that states simply that given two integers `a`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We must first define a helper fact `pow_pred` which simply states that given two integers `a`
```

> and `e`, if `e` is greater than `0` then `a * a ^ (e -1)` is the same as `a ^ e`. This fact is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and `e`, if `e` is greater than `0` then `a * a ^ (e - 1)` is equal to `a ^ e`. This fact is
```

Open Scope Z_scope.

Lemma pow_pred : forall a e, 0 < e -> a * a ^ (Z.pred e) = a ^ e.
Proof.
  intros.
  apply eq_sym.
  replace (a ^ e) with (a ^ (Z.succ (Z.pred e))).
  - apply Z.pow_succ_r.
    apply Zlt_0_le_0_pred.
    assumption.
  - rewrite (Z.succ_pred e).
    reflexivity.
Qed.

Lemma invariant : forall base s,
  reachable base s -> (r s) * (b s) ^ ((e s) - 1) = (b base) ^ (e base).
Proof.
  intros base s H. induction H.
  - simpl.
    rewrite Z.sub_1_r.
    apply pow_pred.
    apply Z.gt_lt.
    assumption.
  - simpl.
    rewrite <- IHreachable.
    rewrite Z.sub_1_r.
    rewrite <- (pow_pred (b STATE) (e STATE - 1)).
    + rewrite Z.mul_assoc. reflexivity.
    + apply Z.gt_lt in H0.
      apply (proj1 (Z.sub_lt_mono_r 1 (e STATE) 1)).
      assumption.
Qed.

Theorem exp_correct : forall base s,
  reachable base s -> e s = 1 -> r s = (b base) ^ (e base).
Proof.
  intros base s H He.
  apply invariant in H.
  rewrite He in H. simpl in H.
  rewrite (Z.mul_1_r (r s)) in H.
  assumption.
Qed. Check exp_correct.
```

While this may seem like quite a lot of work to prove what looks like a pretty simple and obvious
fact it is worth noting two things:

> 1. A proof of this property is beyond the reach of any automated tool available today

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. A proof of this property is beyond the reach of any automated tool available today.
```

2. Our mind is full of hidden assumptions, and facts that may seem obvious are not always so. This
   is not the case for the Coq proof kernel, and once we have convinced it that something is true,
   we can be very sure that it really is.

## Future Work

### Automated Spec Generation

> Act is designed to be simple and explicit. While this supports automated analysis based on the act

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Act is designed to be simple and explicit. While this supports automated analysis based on the Act
```

specifications, it does mean that writing specifications by hand often involves quite some
boilerplate. In many cases we are mostly interested in whether a given bytecode object
satisfies some high level properties, and keeping both the implementation and specification in sync
can introduce unwanted overhead to the development process.

For this reason we intend to build an automated spec generation engine into hevm that will utilise
the symbolic execution engine to produce an exhaustive description of all possible execution paths

> as a set of act specifications. This should allow for fast iteration on the implementation, while

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as a set of Act specifications. This should allow for fast iteration on the implementation, while
```

> allowing for high level analysis of that implementation with Coq and the Act smt backend.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
keeping the barrier low to at any time performing high-level analyses using Coq or the Act SMT backend.
```

There are some additional benefits to this approach. The current symbolic execution backend
represents our first attempt at a bytecode level proof engine for act. Unfortunately while building

> this out we encountered a fundamental issue: while act specs are expressed in terms of unbounded

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
represents our first attempt at a bytecode level proof engine for Act. Unfortunately while building
this out we encountered a fundamental issue: while Act specs are expressed in terms of unbounded
```

integers, the symbolic execution engine in hevm uses bitvectors. This means that checking

> equivalence between a given bytecode object and a set of act specs requires conversions from

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
equivalence between a given bytecode object and a set of Act specs requires conversions from
```

integers to bitvectors. While this is tractable for simple specs, it quickly overwhelms the SMT
solver for any non-trivial contract (including any safe arithmetic!).

An automated spec generation engine allows us to nicely sidestep this issue, we no longer have to
prove equivalence between bytecode and specs, since the specs themselves have been generated

> directly from the bytecode and are therefore "correct by construction". Even in the case where specs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An automated spec generation engine would allow us to sidestep this issue; since the specs would be
generated directly from the bytecode they are *correct by construction*, so it would be unnecessary
to prove equivalence between bytecode and specs. Even in the case where specs
```

have been written by hand, we would still only need to prove equivalence between two sets of specs
(both of which are written in terms of Integers), once again allowing us to avoid the troublesome

> `bv_to_int` and `int_to_bv` smt operations.

Reviewer 2: Is my description of the technical situation still correct with these changes? We would compare the hand-written spec to one that had been generated by hevm?

```suggestion
directly from the bytecode and are therefore "correct by construction". Even when we encounter a
hand-written spec, it would only be necessary to prove equivalence between that and a generated
spec, both of which would be written in terms of integers.
```

### Automated Checks for Spec Integrity

There are currently many specs that typecheck but are still malformed and would invalidate the
proofs derived from them. We intend to add automated analysis passes to detect issues of this kind.
At the moment we currently have the following planned:

- Arithmetic overflow detection ([#109](https://github.com/ethereum/act/issues/111))
- Case consistency checks ([#110](https://github.com/ethereum/act/issues/111))
- Collisions in mapping assignments ([#111](https://github.com/ethereum/act/issues/111))

### Support for Dynamic / Compound Types

While we have some support at the syntax level for specifications involving dynamic types (e.g. `string`

> or `bytes`), the various proof backends do not currently support proof involving these types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
or `bytes`), the various proof backends do not currently support proofs involving these types.
```

Reviewer 3: Same here (proofs)

We also intend to add support for compound types (e.g. array / struct / tuple) to the language and

> proof backends.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
its proof backends.
```

### Multi Contract Specifications

Similarly to dynamic and compound types, while syntax does exist that allows for specification of
multi contract systems, these features are not well supported in the various analysis backends.

### Rounding Error Analysis

Understanding the impact of rounding error in a smart contract is a critical task for secure

> development.  As we saw in the `AMM` example above, numeric error introduced by precision loss can

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Understanding the impact of rounding errors in a smart contract is a critical task for secure
development.  As we saw in the `AMM` example above, a numeric error introduced by precision loss can
```

result in unexpected violations of important security properties.

> There are generally two properties of interest:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are generally two properties of rounding errors which are of interest:
```

- The direction of the rounding error (who loses out)
- The size of the rounding error (by how much do they lose)

We intend to allow users to specify properties relating to rounding by introducing a new operator
(e.g. `exact`, or `toReal`), which would indicate that the numeric expression contained within
should be expressed in various backends using Reals instead of Ints. This would for example allow
for properties that assert statements about the size and direction of the difference between the

> result of the calculation over the real numbers and it's rounded result when expressed over the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
result of the calculation over the real numbers and its rounded result when expressed over the
```

integers.

> For a manual example of a similar analysis, see the [uniswap v1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For an example of such an analysis performed manually, see the [Uniswap v1
```

model](https://github.com/runtimeverification/verified-smart-contracts/blob/uniswap/uniswap/x-y-k.pdf)
produced by Runtime Verification.

### Calls Into Unknown Code

Real world smart contracts must often make calls into unknown code, whether for simple tasks like an

> eth or token transfer, or for more complex actions (e.g. delegation of control for a flash loan).

Reviewer 2: Choose either one of these imo.
```suggestion
ether or token transfer, or for more complex actions (e.g. delegation of control for a flash loan).
```
```suggestion
ETH or token transfer, or for more complex actions (e.g. delegation of control for a flash loan).
```

Each time they do so, they pass control to potentially malicious code that can make arbitrary
modifications to the execution context, something that obviously has deep implications for the
security of the calling contract. If we wish to prove security properties about realistic
smart contracts with Act, we must therefore be able to specify behaviour that includes such calls.

We intend to introduce language constructs and verification routines that will allow specification
and proof of properties relating to such contracts. Some ideas can be found

> [here](https://github.com/ethereum/act/issues/18).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We intend to introduce language constructs and verification routines which will allow specifying
and proving properties of such contracts. For more information, we have an
[issue with early ideas](https://github.com/ethereum/act/issues/18).
```

### Loops and Loop Invariants

Although generally inadvisable, loops are sometimes unavoidable when developing smart contracts
(e.g. numeric routines). We intend to introduce syntax and verification routines that allow

> specification and proof for loop invariants.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(e.g. in numeric routines). We intend to introduce syntax and verification extensions which allow
for specification and proving of loop invariants.
```

Some early thoughts and ideas can be found in these github issues

> [#2](https://github.com/ethereum/act/issues/2), [#3](https://github.com/ethereum/act/issues/3).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For those interested, we have some [early thoughts](https://github.com/ethereum/act/issues/2) and [discussion](https://github.com/ethereum/act/issues/3) on the specifics of how to encode loop invariants.
```

### Economic Analysis

Act could be extended with a backend that integrates, or exports to an agent based modelling

> framework to allow for complex economic analysis. We believe that Act has some unique advantages

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Act could be extended with a backend that exports to – possibly even integrates
with – an agent-based modelling framework, to allow for complex economic
analysis. We believe that Act has some unique advantages
```

  - [Underpowered Invariants](#underpowered-invariants)
- [Coq Export](#coq-export)
  - [A Brief Introduction to Proof in Coq](#a-brief-introduction-to-proof-in-coq)
  - [Act Export](#act-export)
- [Future Work](#future-work)
  - [Automated Spec Generation](#automated-spec-generation)
  - [Automated Checks for Spec Integrity](#automated-checks-for-spec-integrity)
  - [Support for Dynamic / Compound Types](#support-for-dynamic--compound-types)
  - [Multi Contract Specifications](#multi-contract-specifications)
  - [Rounding Error Analysis](#rounding-error-analysis)
  - [Calls Into Unknown Code](#calls-into-unknown-code)
  - [Loops and Loop Invariants](#loops-and-loop-invariants)
  - [Economic Analysis](#economic-analysis)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## Motivation & Design Philosophy

Smart contract development is difficult. The code we write must secure large sums of money in an
extremely adverserial environment, and even a single oversight can easily result in the loss of
millions of dollars. In this context being able to define and prove the correctness of key security

> properties is enourmously valuable. Act grew out of the work of [verifying multi-collateral Dai](https://github.com/dapphub/k-dss/) and [Uniswap v2](https://github.com/dapp-org/k-uniswap-v2), and is a ground-up rewrite in Haskell of the [prototypical specification language](https://github.com/dapphub/klab/blob/master/acts.md) which was developed as a part of that process, incorporating many of the lessons learned along the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
properties is enormously valuable. Act grew out of the work of [verifying multi-collateral Dai](https://github.com/dapphub/k-dss/) and [Uniswap v2](https://github.com/dapp-org/k-uniswap-v2), and is a ground-up rewrite in Haskell of the [prototypical specification language](https://github.com/dapphub/klab/blob/master/acts.md) which was developed as a part of that process, incorporating many of the lessons learned along the
```

equivalence between a contract specification and an implementation of that specification in EVM.

Two claims are generated for each behaviour, `Pass` and `Fail`. The `Pass` claim states
that if all preconditions in the `iff` block are true, then all executions will succeed, storage
will be updated according to the `storage` block, and the specified return value will, in fact, be returned. The
`Fail` claim states that should any of the preconditions be false, all executions will revert.

In both cases we begin the proof by constraining calldata to be of the form specified in the behaviours'
`interface` block (i.e. a concrete selector with abstract types), making the relevant assumptions
depending on whether the proof is a `Pass` or `Fail` kind, and then symbolically executing
the bytecode object with storage held to be completely abstract.

This produces a tree of potential executions where each node represents a potential branching
point, and each leaf represents a possible final state of the contract after the execution of a single call.

In the case of a `Fail` claim, we can then check that all leaves represent states in which execution

> has reverted. Inversely, for a `Pass` claim we can check that in all leaves, storage has been updated as expected and the content of

Author: ```suggestion
In the case of a `Fail` claim, we can then check that each leaf represents a state in which execution
has reverted, while for a `Pass` claim we can check that storage has been updated as expected, and that the contents of
```

```Coq
Fixpoint plus (n : nat) (m : nat) : nat :=
  match n with
  | O ⇒ m
  | S n' ⇒ S (plus n' m)
  end.
```

Here we define a recursive function (a `Fixpoint`) that takes two numbers `n` and `m` and returns
the sum of these two numbers. The implementation is defined recursively with pattern matching. You
might think of this definition as "unwrapping" each application of `S` from the first argument until
we reach its `O`. Then we start wrapping the second argument in the same number of `S`s.

Now we're ready to prove something! Lets prove that `0 + n == n`:

```Coq
Theorem plus_O_n :
  forall n : nat, plus O n = n.
Proof.
  intros n. simpl. reflexivity.
Qed.
```

We first define our theorem and give it a name (`plus_O_n`). Then we define the proof goal, in the
form of a dependent type. We claim that for all `n`, where `n` is an instance of our `nat` type, `0
+ n` is equal to `n`. Finally, we construct a proof, in the form of a series of tactics. Tactics may
implement either backwards inference (transforming the goal) or forwards inference (transforming
evidence).

The best way to understand the system is to run the software yourself, and play around with the

> various tactics.  In this case the goal is simple enough; Coq is able to simplify `plus O n` into

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
various tactics.  In this case the goal is simple enough; once we've specified that the proof will be on `n`, Coq is able to simplify `plus O n` into
```

- `exp0_step`: states that for a pair of states `BASE` and `STATE`, `exp0 STATE` (i.e. the result of
    calling `exp()` against an arbitrary contract state) is reachable from `BASE` if `STATE` is
    reachable from `BASE`, all the state variables in `STATE` (`e`, `b`, `r`) are within the range
    of a `uint256`, the result of the calculations `r * b` and `e - 1` are within the range of a
    `uint256`, and `e` is greater than `1`.

This gives us a pair of [inference rules](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inference_rules) that we can
use to prove facts about the set of reachable states defined by the specification for the `Exponent`
contract.

An example of such a proof is contained in the `Theory.v` file in the `src/exponent` directory of
the [examples repo](https://github.com/d-xo/act-examples). The core fact that we wish to prove is
that when `e` is `1`, `r` is equal to `b ^ e`. This can be expressed in coq as:

```Coq
forall (base, s : State),
  reachable base s -> e s = 1 -> r s = (b base) ^ (e base).
```

Expressed more verbosely: for all states `base` and `s`, if `s` is reachable from `base`, and the

> value of `e` in `s` is `1` then the result variable `r` in `s` has the value of `b` from `base`

Author: ```suggestion
value of `e` in `s` is `1`, then the result variable `r` in `s` is equal to `b` from `base`
```

way.

The following are some key design goals:

### Ease of Refinement

Proving properties directly against EVM bytecode is difficult and expensive. Compiler output
contains much extraneous detail (e.g. overflow checks, bitmasks in storage access routines, function
selector dispatch logic) that is not generally relevant when proving the correctness of a high level
property, but that must still be taken into account. A widely used and powerful technique is to use
a process of refinement, where the properties of interest are proven against a high level
specification that abstracts much of this detail away. A seperate proof can then be carried out to
show that a given bytecode object faithfully implements the abstract specification. The
[SeL4](https://sel4.systems/) microkernel is a notable real world application of this technique,
where properties are proven against a high level spec in the Isabelle proof assistant, and then
successive refinement steps (high level spec -> haskell implementation -> C implementation

> -> binary compiler output) are used to prove these properties down to the binary level.

Author: ```suggestion
successive refinement steps are used to prove these properties down to the binary level ([1](http://www.sigops.org/s/conferences/sosp/2009/papers/klein-sosp09.pdf)[2](https://ts.data61.csiro.au/publications/nicta_full_text/6449.pdf))
```
Ah I see, yes I think you're correct. Maybe something like this?

</td></tr>
<tr><td class='line'>
</td></tr>
<tr><td class='line'><span style='color: #af0000;'>storage</span>
</td></tr>
<tr><td class='line'>
</td></tr>
<tr><td class='line'>  <span style='color: #4e4e4e;'>val</span> <span style='font-weight: bold;color: #4e4e4e;'>=&gt;</span> <span style='color: #4e4e4e;'>x</span>
</td></tr>
<tr><td class='line'>
</td></tr>
<tr><td class='line'><span style='color: #af0000;'>returns</span> <span style='color: #4e4e4e;'>x</span>
</td></tr>
</table></pre>
</div>

Act needs to have access to the storage layout metadata output by solc to compute the index in
storage for each variable mentioned in the spec, so we need to pass a solc output json when trying
to prove equivalence. In the [examples repo](https://github.com/d-xo/act-examples) you can run `dapp
build` and then `act hevm --spec src/simple.act --soljson out/dapp.sol.json` to attempt to prove
equivalence of the spec and the runtime bytecode:

```
< act hevm --spec src/simple.act --soljson out/dapp.sol.json
checking postcondition...
Q.E.D.
Successfully proved set(Pass), 2 cases.
checking postcondition...
Q.E.D.

> Successfully proved set(Fail), 2 cases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Successfully proved set(Fail), 2 cases.
==== SUCCESS ====
All behaviours implemented as specified ∎.
```

  - [Calls Into Unknown Code](#calls-into-unknown-code)
  - [Loops and Loop Invariants](#loops-and-loop-invariants)
  - [Economic Analysis](#economic-analysis)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## Motivation & Design Philosophy

Smart contract development is difficult. The code we write must secure large sums of money in an
extremely adverserial environment, and even a single oversight can easily result in the loss of
millions of dollars. In this context being able to define and prove the correctness of key security
properties is enormously valuable. Act grew out of the verification work carried out for
[multi-collateral Dai](https://github.com/dapphub/k-dss/) and [Uniswap
v2](https://github.com/dapp-org/k-uniswap-v2), and is a ground-up rewrite in Haskell of the
[prototype specification language](https://github.com/dapphub/klab/blob/master/acts.md) developed as
a part of that process, incorporating many of the lessons learned along the way.

The following are some key design goals:

### Ease of Refinement

Proving properties directly against EVM bytecode is difficult and expensive. Compiler output

> contains much extraneous detail (e.g. overflow checks, bitmasks in storage access routines, function

Reviewer: also abi encoding/decoding

in the spec, and then dispatch queries based on this encoding to an SMT solver (currently z3 and
cvc4 are supported). An SMT solver is a system that takes a collection of contraints (a query),
where each constraint is a statement in [first order
logic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/First-order_logic), and determines whether there exists an
assignment of values to the abstract variables in the query such that all constraints are satisfied.

As an example, we could encode the query "for all integers x and y, is there an assignment of values
to x and y such that x + y == 13 and y - 7 == x" in the widely supported
[smt-lib](https://smtlib.cs.uiowa.edu/index.shtml) language as follows:

```smt2
(declare-const x Int)
(declare-const y Int)

(assert (= (+ x y) 13))
(assert (= (- y 7) x))

(check-sat)
(get-model)
```

When passed to an smt solver (e.g. z3), this would return:

```
sat
(
  (define-fun x () Int
    3)
  (define-fun y () Int
    10)
)
```

Where `sat` means that a satisfying assignment does exist, and the remaining output gives us the
values of the assignment found by the solver (`x == 3` and `y == 10`).

> Proof in an SMT solver can sometimes feel a little "backwards", instead of asking the solver to

Reviewer 3: Maybe we should just say SMT-based program verification is often done by contradiction here? I feel like the `backwards` idea is a bit vague.

directly provide a proof for a given statement, we instead ask it to find an example where the

> statment is untrue, and if none are found, we can infer the truth of the original statement. As an

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
statement is untrue, and if none are found, we can infer the truth of the original statement. As an
```

example, if we wished to prove [distributivity](https://www.decision-procedures.org/) for integer
arithmetic, we would encode the query as follows:

```smt2
(declare-const x Int)
(declare-const y Int)
(declare-const z Int)

(assert (not
  (= (* x (+ y z))
     (+ (* x y) (* x z)))))

(check-sat)
```

and when run in a solver, we would get `unsat` as a result, meaning that there are no possible
assignments to the variables, `x`, `y` and `z` where distributivity does not hold.

#### Postcondition Encoding

For the postcondition claims, we tell the solver to assume the truth of all preconditions, and that
all storage updates have occurred as defined in the `storage` block, and then ask it to find an

> assignment for the abstract variables in the spec (calldata, environment, and storage) that violates

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
assignment for the symbolic variables in the spec (calldata, environment, and storage) that violates
```
?

</td></tr>
<tr><td class='line'>    <span style='color: #4e4e4e;'>reserve1</span> <span style='font-weight: bold;color: #4e4e4e;'>=&gt;</span> <span style='color: #4e4e4e;'>reserve1</span> <span style='font-weight: bold;color: #4e4e4e;'>+</span> <span style='color: #4e4e4e;'>amt</span>
</td></tr>
</table></pre>
</div>

If we run `act prove` against the above spec, we find that there is in fact an error:

```
> act prove --file src/amm-broken.act

Invariants:

  ((1000 * 1000) <= (Amm.reserve0 * Amm.reserve1)) of Amm violated:

    counterexample:

      calldata:

        swap0(amt = 1)

      storage:

        prestate:

          Amm.reserve0 = 2
          Amm.reserve1 = 500000

        poststate:

          Amm.reserve0 = 3
          Amm.reserve1 = 333333

    counterexample:

      calldata:

        swap1(amt = 1)

      storage:

        prestate:

          Amm.reserve1 = 2
          Amm.reserve0 = 500000

        poststate:

          Amm.reserve1 = 3
          Amm.reserve0 = 333333
```

> If the `Amm` is in the state  `reserve0 == 2` and `reserve1 == 5000,000`, and `swap0` is called with `amt

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the `Amm` is in the state  `reserve0 == 2` and `reserve1 == 500,000`, and `swap0` is called with `amt
```

weakest invariant that does hold over the full transition system (while remaining on the same form as the
original) is `x < 7`. The strongest is `x < 3`.

## Coq Export

While the automated proof backend is quite capable, there are still many properties that are too
challenging for automated tools. For this reason Act allows exporting the transition system to the
Coq proof assistant, where manual proofs of arbitrary complexity can be carried out.

A proof assistant provides tools that help with the construction of proof.  Coq, in particular, is
highly interactive. The user typically builds proofs step by step, with the software giving feedback
as the proof progresses.

The requirements for proof in a system like Coq, Isabelle, or Lean are quite strict. These tools
only accept proofs that are algorithmically verifiable to be valid series of applications of the
system's inference rules.  This is generally stricter than what is typically expected of pen and
paper proofs, which often omit tedious details in the interest of clarity and concision.

The verification of these proofs is performed in a minimal and well-audited kernel. Although occasionally bugs have

> been found in Coq's and other systems' kernels, a proof in these systems is generally quite strong

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
been found in Coq's and other systems' kernels, a proof in these systems is generally a quite strong evidence of correctness.
```

evidence.

### A Brief Introduction to Proof in Coq

Coq is a complex system with a steep learning curve, and while a full tutorial on programming in
Coq is out of the scope of this blog post, we can give a little taste of how things work. For a more
thorough introduction, the books [Software Foundations](https://softwarefoundations.cis.upenn.edu/)
and [Certified Programming With Dependent Types](http://adam.chlipala.net/cpdt/) are both excellent.
Software Foundations in particular is a great introduction for users with little experience in the
fields of formal logic and proof.

The Coq system is composed of three languages: a minimal functional programming language (Gallina),
a tactics language for the construction of proof (Ltac), and a "vernacular" for interaction with the

> kernel.  Lets start with the very basics: defining the natural numbers and proving something about

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
kernel.  Let's start with the very basics: defining the natural numbers and proving something about
```

We define two constructors: `O`, representing `0`, and `S`, which when applied to the natural number
`n` produces the representation of the number `n + 1` (`S` as in "successor"). To give a concrete example,
`3` would be represented in this encoding as `S (S (S 0)))` i.e `1 + (1 + (1 + 0))`.

```Coq
Inductive nat : Type :=
  | O
  | S (n : nat).
```

This is an example of a [unary](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unary_numeral_system) number
representation.  It can often be helpful to represent numbers this way, since the inductive nature
of the definition lends itself to inductive proof techniques.

Let's continue by defining addition over our `nat` type:

```Coq
Fixpoint plus (n : nat) (m : nat) : nat :=
  match n with
  | O ⇒ m
  | S n' ⇒ S (plus n' m)
  end.
```

Here we define a recursive function (a `Fixpoint`) that takes two numbers `n` and `m` and returns
the sum of these two numbers. The implementation is defined recursively with pattern matching. You
might think of this definition as "unwrapping" each application of `S` from the first argument until
we reach its `O`. Then we start wrapping the second argument in the same number of `S`s.

> Now we're ready to prove something! Lets prove that `0 + n == n`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now we're ready to prove something! Let's prove that `0 + n == n`:
```

There are some additional benefits to this approach. The current symbolic execution backend
represents our first attempt at a bytecode level proof engine for Act. Unfortunately while building
this out we encountered a fundamental issue: while Act specs are expressed in terms of unbounded
integers, the symbolic execution engine in hevm uses bitvectors. This means that checking
equivalence between a given bytecode object and a set of Act specs requires conversions from
integers to bitvectors. While this is tractable for simple specs, it quickly overwhelms the SMT
solver for any non-trivial contract (including any safe arithmetic!).

An automated spec generation engine would allow us to sidestep this issue; since the specs would be
generated directly from the bytecode they are *correct by construction*, so it would be unnecessary
to prove equivalence between bytecode and specs. Even in the case where specs
have been written by hand, we would still only need to prove equivalence between two sets of specs
(both of which are written in terms of Integers), once again allowing us to avoid the troublesome

> `bv_to_int` and `int_to_bv` smt operations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`bv_to_int` and `int_to_bv` SMT operations.
```

> ### Automated Checks for Spec Integrity

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Automated Checks of Spec Integrity
```
?

There are currently many specs that typecheck but are still malformed and would invalidate the
proofs derived from them. We intend to add automated analysis passes to detect issues of this kind.
At the moment we currently have the following planned:

- Arithmetic overflow detection ([#109](https://github.com/ethereum/act/issues/111))
- Case consistency checks ([#110](https://github.com/ethereum/act/issues/111))

> - Collisions in mapping assignments ([#111](https://github.com/ethereum/act/issues/111))

Reviewer 3: The links are all `111` but the tags 109, 110, and 111.

We intend to introduce language constructs and verification routines which will allow specifying
and proving properties of such contracts. For more information, we have an
[issue with early ideas](https://github.com/ethereum/act/issues/18).

### Loops and Loop Invariants

Although generally inadvisable, loops are sometimes unavoidable when developing smart contracts
(e.g. in numeric routines). We intend to introduce syntax and verification extensions which allow
for specification and proving of loop invariants.

For those interested, we have some [early thoughts](https://github.com/ethereum/act/issues/2) and [discussion](https://github.com/ethereum/act/issues/3) on the specifics of how to encode loop invariants.

### Economic Analysis

Act could be extended with a backend that exports to – possibly even integrates
with – an agent-based modelling framework, to allow for complex economic
analysis. We believe that Act has some unique advantages
here. Simulation could be carried out against the Act expressions (which are generally significantly
simpler than the EVM that they model), allowing for fast execution, while still maintaining a formal

> guarantee that the simulation accurately models the deployed implementation.

Reviewer 3: Maybe end with something like
```
Contributions are always welcome, please report bugs on GH, etc
```
?

  - [Economic Analysis](#economic-analysis)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## Installation

Act can currently be installed via [nix](https://nixos.org/guides/install-nix.html) with the
following commands:

```
# configure nix to use prebuilt binaries for hevm (optional)
nix-shell -p cachix --command "cachix add dapp"

# install act v0.1
nix-env -iA act -if https://api.github.com/repos/ethereum/act/tarball/v0.1
```

If you want to play around with the examples in this blogpost, you can checkout the
[act-examples](TODO!) repo. A call to `nix-shell` from the repository root will drop you into an
environment with all required tools installed and configured.

## Language

A specification of a contract written in act consists of a constructor and a set of behaviours:

- The constructor specification defines the structure of the contract state, the initial value for
  the state, and a list of invariants that the contract should satisfy.

- Each behaviour specification determines how a contract method updates the state, and its return
  value, and the conditions that must be satisfied in order for it to be applied.

> Alternatively, they can be thought of an initial state and a set of state transitions, determining

Author: ```suggestion
Alternatively, they can be thought of as an initial state and a set of state transitions, determining
```
